# Transactions between Firms Regarding Inputs

When a firm needs to do business — either to sell goods to consumers (as a distributor) or to produce goods (as a producer), the firm first drafts a plan. The plan has three primary functions:
1. It sets forth a budget in terms of direct and interect labor time for the accomplishment of the plan.
2. It keeps track of how the budgeted hours are expended in production.
3. It keeps track of how the product is then taken up, or consumed, which is what makes the whole plan worth having been drafted and executed.

The budget is set forth in terms of hours of work. The direct hours, also called _living labor_, are the hours that it will take for the current firm to produce the product. The _indirect_ hours are the hours that other firms have put into producing the procuts needed as _inputs_ to the current product. We divide these inputs into two categories, called by the simplifying terms _machinery_ and _raw materials_. Accordingly, every plan has separate line items in its budget (in hours) for machinery, raw materials, and living labor.

It is useful in this context to think of the credits for hours of work as a kind of currency, like money. When the firm first drafts the plan and makes up the budget, it puts hours ("money") into its three accounts, which are to be spent: the living labor hours will be transferred to the workers as credits for their work, and the raw materials and machinery hours will be transferred to the respective producers of those input products. But where does that "money" (the hours) come from? What gives the firm the right just to make up hours out of nothing? Here, compare this problem to the problem of where a capitalist company gets its money. In a ocmmon scenario, it _borrows_ the money from a bank or an investor, which creates a debt, which is a promise to repay. When the capitalist firm finishes producing the products, it sells them and transfers some of the revenue back to the lender to pay off the debt. In a labor-time economy, the "bank" is the whole of society, and the firm transfers _the whole_ debt back to the society when the goods are sold. The debt is represented as the budget line item in the plan called _prd_. This is why it is a negative number whose absolute value is the sum of the positive input line items — machinery, raw materials, and living labor. It is exactly how much the firm "owes," because it is how much it has "borrowed" from society. Thus, when a buyer — a consumer (for a distributor) or a downstream producer (for an upstream producer) buys the products, the buyer transfers hours to the seller firm — specifically, to the _prd_ account for the plan at the firm by which the product was produced. This "pays off" the "debt."  When a downstream firm gets raw materials from an upstream firm, it generally consumes a whole batch (an order) all at once, and transfers enough hours to the upstream firm to cover the whole order, and, generally, the size of the order is also the size of the plan. Therefore, in that scenario, the hours transferred in are equal in magnitude to the _prd_ account, and, when the buyer firm transfers those hours to the seller firm, the seller's plan's _prd_ account goes right up to 0. When a consumer buys a single unit of a product from a distributor, the price of that unit is added back to the _prd_ account of the plan at the distributor for the distribution of that product.

In a simple system, whenever a firm gets ready to execute a plan, it first goes and buys all the inputs (machinery and raw materials) it needs for the plan. The machinery and raw materials line items in the plan would instantly go to 0, because the firm transfers all of those hours to the upstream producers of the machines and raw materials. What's left in the budget is the living labor hours. The workers go to work and receive credits for their work every day (or hour or pay period), where, each time, those living labor hours are transferred out of the living labor line item of the plan, over to the workers' individual accounts. Thus living labor comes down as the workers work, and reaches 0 when the workers have finished executing the plan. Then the firm sells the products. Either all at once (for a producer) or gradually (for a distributor), _prd_ goes to 0. Thus, after both producing the planned goods and selling them, all four line items should be 0.

Things in our simulated economy are slightly more complex. In the above scenario, the firm cannot start work on the plan right away — it first has to acquire the raw materials and machines — and the above scenario assumes that it has to get new machines for every plan, and gets only the raw materials it needs for that plan. This would not be a good way of doing business in the real world. It is more efficient to buy machines when the firm first sets up shop, and to replace them only when they stop working. Likewise, it's more efficient to get raw materials in bulk and stockpile them, use them up as necessary for various plans, and replenish them when the stockpiles (inventories) run out rather than whenever a plan gets started. This implies an indirect budgeting of the machines and raw materials, since we are now pooling them for use across various plans that begin and end at various times. To represent this more efficient approach in the case of raw materials, we should have each firm have a single _pooled_ account for all raw materials, _in addition to_ the individual raw materials line items in the various plans. The sequence then goes as follows:
1. The firm makes a plan to produce (producer) or distribute (distributor) a product.
2. The plan contains machinery and raw materials budget line items, as before. These contribute to the total hours, and _prd_ is the additive inverse of the total hours — the debt created by this plan.
3. When the firm starts executing the plan, the quantity in the raw materials line item goes instantly to 0, and that same quantity is _added_ to the firm's firm-wide pooled raw materials account.
4. Whenever the firm draws a raw material unit from an inventory, it also checks whether the inventory has shrunk down far enough to require replenishment. In that case, the firm orders a new batch of that product from another firm that produces that product.
5. When the upstream producer has finished making the (raw material) product for the firm, it ships it to the firm, and the firm pays for it by transferring the cost of that batch of input products from its own pooled raw materials account into the _prd_ account of the upstream firm's plan — i.e., the plan that the upstream firm had executed to produce this batch of input products.

